HAS	IT	EVER	occurred	to	you	that	the	first	thought	of	your	day	is	the	most important	one? ‘Good	morning!’	is	the	way	we	greet	our	family	members	when	we	wake	up. Be	it	at	school,	college	or	a	workplace,	we	greet	each	other	with	this	positive phrase. But	what	can	one	do	to	really	make	the	morning	good? In	the	Indian	tradition,	we	have	a	method	to	divinize	our	thoughts. We	start	the	day	with	a	sense	of	gratitude. Many	traditions	have	specific	prayers	that	should	be	chanted	as	soon	as	one wakes	up,	while	others	encourage	sitting	quietly	and	meditating	for	some	time before	one	goes	about	their	daily	routine. Chanakya,	who	wrote	the	Arthashastra,	had	some	good	tips	on	how	to	begin one’s	day.	He	suggested, ‘He	(the	king)	should	awaken	to	the	sound	of	musical	instruments.’	(1.19.21) The	first	book	of	the	Arthashastra	focuses	on	the	training	that	the	king underwent.	It	is	called	‘Vidyasamuddesh’.	In	it,	he	shares	his	knowledge	on	how to	be	a	good	leader.	Chanakya	also	gives	practical	tips	on	how	to	execute	one’s leadership	skills.	Note	that	these	tips	can	also	be	followed	by	those	who	are	not leaders,	but	commoners	like	you	or	me.	Its	beauty	lies	in	the	fact	that	once	we follow	the	tips,	we	automatically	start	developing	the	leadership	qualities	in	us. The	first	step	of	honing	one’s	leadership	skills	lies	in	the	way	we	begin	our day.
As	stated	above,	Chanakya	suggests	that	one	should	awaken	to	the	sound	of musical	instruments.	This	means	that	when	a	person	wakes	up	listening	to	music, it	sets	the	right	mood. Imagine	waking	up	from	a	bad	dream—the	whole	day	starts	on	a	negative note.	You	feel	drained	with	every	passing	minute. But	all	that	can	be	corrected	just	with	the	sound	of	musical	instruments. How	do	we	practise	this	message	by	Chanakya	in	our	daily	life?	Here	are some	tips: Sleep	well It	is	not	just	how	you	wake	up,	but	also	the	quality	of	your	sleep	that	matters.	A good	seven	to	eight	hours	of	sleep	is	essential	for	an	average	person.	If	one sleeps	early,	and	has	had	an	undisturbed	sleep,	then	waking	up	will	be	an	easy task.	It	helps	one	feel	energetic	and	rejuvenated	to	start	the	day.	So	make	sure you	sleep	on	time	to	wake	up	on	time. Alarm	clock There	are	two	types	of	alarm	clocks	one	can	use	for	waking	up—the	external alarm	clock	and	the	internal	alarm	clock.	Most	of	us	are	aware	of	the	external alarm	clock,	which	rings	at	a	preset	time.	But	do	we	know	about	our	internal alarm	clock? People	who	have	control	over	their	minds	use	this	alarm	clock	as	well	to wake	up.	They	are	so	disciplined	that	they	instruct	their	mind,	‘Tomorrow morning,	I	want	to	wake	up	at	5	a.m.’	and	you	would	be	surprised	to	know	that they	wake	up	exactly	at	5	a.m.	without	needing	an	external	alarm	clock. This	requires	a	little	bit	of	practice	because	you	have	to	keep	instructing your	mind	until	it	listens.	Try	it	for	some	time	and	you	will	eventually	start waking	up	at	the	decided	time. Music For	those	who	use	an	external	alarm	clock,	the	alarm	sound	is	crucial. Nowadays,	most	of	us	use	the	alarm	clock	on	our	mobile	phones.	Choose	your alarm	tone	very	carefully.	There	are	various	ringtones	to	choose	from.	Choose something	melodious,	for	example,	an	alarm	tone	that	is	inspired	by	nature,	like the	call	of	birds	or	the	sound	of	the	wind. A	loud	and	heavy	ringtone	will	ensure	that	you	wake	up,	but	in	a	disturbed state.	And	if	there	are	others	in	the	room,	they	too	will	get	disturbed.	So	in
general,	a	loud	ringtone	will	spoil	everyone’s	day. As	Chanakya	said,	do	wake	up	with	the	sound	of	music—but	the	right music. Some	even	start	their	day	with	devotional	music	and	spiritual	hymns	and mantras. Carry	the	mood It	is	not	enough	to	just	wake	up	in	the	right	mood;	one	should	also	carry	on	in that	cheerful	mood	all	day	long.	Be	the	source	of	inspiration	to	others	around you.	When	you	feel	good	about	yourself,	you	should	make	others	feel	good about	themselves	too.	Greet	others	around	you	positively. As	the	old	saying	goes,	‘The	best	make-up	on	your	face	is	a	smile.’	This	will help	make	sure	that	your	‘good	morning’	becomes	a	‘good	day’.